India is now in its second phase of
lockdown and the question remains the
fundamental one
a knockdown will flatten the curve but
how sustainable is it in the long run
this is not a question just for Indians
it's a question for the world everywhere
the United States of America is
grappling with this question as well the
Trump administration wants to lift the
lockdown
it's the governors who are pushing back
the answer it eventually has to come
from science but if science really
telling us all that we need to know to
answer this question so leave today were
joined by drops of hot Micucci he's
alone college east he's also it's very
awkward and a fine fine mind it's really
a pleasure to have him with us tonight
first I just wanna ask you to give us a
sense of what's happening there but New
York in many ways here where you are is
has been the epicenter of this pandemic
in the United States of America
does it look like the virus has peaked
there or do we not know the answer to
that well it certainly seems that the
deaths from the virus have peaked the
daily death count was in the 700s about
a week ago and the death counts are now
in the 4 to 500 range there is a
suspicion that we're under counting the
deaths because there are many people who
have died without a diagnosis but even
if you count those I think it there is a
sense that that it's peaked now you know
one thing as a I'm also trained as a
viral immunologist and one of the things
about these viruses is that that's when
you lift the when you lift the lockdown
there is a distinct possibility that
there would be a resurgence so the idea
of the peak is currently a temporary
idea I mean I'm certainly happy but what
did that peak in justify the opening of
New York City again is a question that
you and I will discuss what is your own
sense of that that question and I asked
that because obviously different
countries different cities will answer
that question differently so let's start
with New York first would you if you
were advising the governor would you say
it's time to experiment easing
well I think the governor has the right
approach to this he is going to do this
in phases the phase one may be lifting a
little bit more than the essential
workers but scientifically speaking we
need a certain number of things to be
true number one is that we probably need
to triple or quadruple the number of
tests that we're doing for people
carrying the virus and people who are
immune from the virus now it's important
to realize that there are two different
kinds of tests and they give you
different kinds of information one test
is the oral swab or the nasal swab and
that is a test that detects whether you
actively have the virus or not are you
in the middle of an infection whether
you're secreting or excreting virus
etcetera and whether you're infectious
in those circumstances the correct thing
to do of course is to decide whether you
want to be in quarantine or isolation or
whether you need that hyouta medical
care and go to the hospital for a tube
Medicare a second completely different
so that test has now gone through many
iterations the viral swab and we think
that that test is now accurate there
were some mishaps as you know in this
country with with that test it came
about 30 days too late and 30 days for a
virus that spreads so rapidly is a very
crucial time the second test is the
antibody test the antibody test tells
you whether you've previously had the
virus or not but also the antibodies
start rising while you're having while
you might be having viral secretions so
if you combine these two tests together
you get three categories of people those
who are actively infectious those who
are actively infectious but are
developing immunity and those who are no
longer infectious as far as we can tell
but have developed immunity I think in
order for any country any state these
two tests are crucial at large scale to
figuring out whether that
can be opened or not open because just
to give you one example if we find that
60% of New Yorkers it's not a lot and
this is a hypothetical number if we find
that 50 or 60% of New Yorkers are no
longer shedding the virus but have
already have already acquired immunity
to the virus then I think it's quite
safe to open New York City we still have
to deal with what you do with people
coming in we still will have to use
masks but if we find that 2% of people
in New York City are already immune to
the virus and 20% of the people in New
York City are actively shedding the
virus then of course it is dangerous to
open the city because that will cause
our healthcare system to collapse but
Siddharth you know India hasn't even
begun the antibodies test yet I know
that there is a waiting line for the
kids and and you know we're waiting to
start that would they also then be
random or random testing and then random
sampling because without that you're
gonna actually guess every single person
that's right so so I think random
testing does have a role in this because
I think the most important thing which
Kerala has done and which other states
are not doing is to be driven by data
and not by emotions and the data is
supplied by a combination as I said off
the oral swab sorry the nasal swab and
the antibody tests so I think it's
important to be driven by data and not
be driven by by emotions here there's
there's a lot of science behind all of
this I also have really quite a strong
message of hope which is that drugs are
in development antibodies are in
development and vaccines are in
development they just need time this is
the fastest anyone has ever worked to
develop these medicines and scientists
and physicians were really you know have
been heroic in their efforts to do this
but we have to be data-driven we can't
be emotion driven in this and the more
data we have the better it is can you
tell us in in simple terms without being
in
where we stand on the medicines we don't
know what the vaccine it needs time
there are trials that have begun we saw
that announcement in the United Kingdom
today but where do we stand on the drugs
because there's been such conflicting
science in India for example people do
continue to treat patients with
hydroxychloroquine and as it's from I
seen it's an experimental approach but
it's in the absence of clarity on what
else to do
now there is talk of black plasma as a
possible approach but what do we know
why what do we still not know so drug
developments and vaccine development
proceeds in stages the first drugs that
are likely to be effective for force are
Skov - are drugs that are repurposed and
by that I mean drugs have already been
used in humans that are now being
repurposed or reused in this context and
of course hydroxychloroquine and is it
from ours and fit into that category the
data that we have so far and in fact was
another another piece of data from
yesterday is that at least in moderate
to severe patients and perhaps even in
less moderate patients this drug
combination does not seem to be very
effective there is a second drug called
REM des appear from Gilead
pharmaceutical that is going through
very active testing two articles have
been released on it it seems that we
still don't know whether it works or not
it needs to be fully tested and those
tests the first of those tests will come
in late April but it is a promising drug
it has been used before in in other
viral infections in animal studies this
drug seems to work whether it works on
severe or moderate or prophylactically
we don't know the second set of drugs
that isn't so that brings us up to April
early May and that will really change
the game I think the presence of a drug
will really change the game the so I'm
just going in an orderly progression the
third set of drugs that are likely to
come up are antibodies and
bodies are made by cells and so it's not
easy to produce them as you might know
Kiran Shah from bio Khan and I have been
in extensive negotiations with various
companies because we have biocon as the
capacity to produce these antibodies and
so we are trying to get these antibodies
produced but of course long before their
production they have to be run through
the same kind of clinical trials that
any drug has to run through but there's
a lot of promise in them because exactly
as you pointed out in a very small case
study when people who had already had
recovered from SARS of - when their
antibodies were given to people who had
the infection the people the patients
recovered that would suggest that the
antibodies are active we just have to
make those antibodies are naturally
occurring antibodies that happen in
human so that you know brings us up to
June and July at least it takes a while
to produce them and we don't have a lot
of capacity the whole world doesn't have
capacity these are made in swimming pool
sized flasks which have to be kept clean
this is a big project finally we come to
the last two categories new drugs drugs
that we invent from scratch those have
to be tested first of course to make
sure that they are not toxic because
human beings have never been tested on
these drugs that already brings us into
september/october and then the
production of those drugs and vaccines
now the first vaccines as you very well
know have gone into humans both from the
Oxford group and from moderna and from a
whole bunch of other groups vaccines
have the following problem the best they
are the most effective but there are two
issues or three issues with vaccines
number one is in the case of a vaccine
you're giving it to a healthy person so
you have to be extraordinarily sure that
it is safe because you're not giving it
to a diseased person you're giving it to
a healthy person now that's number one
- is that they take a long time because
if you have a patient who's already
infected with with the virus then of
course you can test whether the patient
is getting better or getting worse when
you do a vaccine trial you have to test
whether if you randomized it you have to
test whether a random people random
group of healthy people are getting more
infections compared to those who didn't
get the vaccine and you can imagine
that's much much longer much more
complicated and finally if vaccines have
production issues you have to produce
1000 several million doses if you really
want to vaccinate a large percentage of
the people so for a vaccine at the most
optimally we're looking at you know at
the fastest we could do is October
November possibly a little bit longer
than that most vaccines take about 12
months so drugs are drugs in the
physical production of antibodies seems
to be if all goes well a faster timeline
that a vaccine that's right but also
remember that drugs the antibodies
unfortunately are both the drugs and the
antibodies are for therapeutic use
they're not free used to prevent the
disease and obviously if we could
prevent the disease from happening in
the first place that would be the best
thing to do right now none of this is in
play right now what we have in play is
exactly what as you said the state of
Kerala is doing isolation testing and
quarantine possibly lockdowns and the
lifting of lockdowns in a date obtain a
data-driven man now in India as you know
there is a different debates than in
other countries because it really is
about you know knives and likelihoods
and there are any number of poor people
that I have met I am walking with
migrant workers as recently as yesterday
they're still walking the expressways of
India arranging open our classes class
differences in a plastic ID and so many
of them just say one thing the poverty
working us is horrible virus what are
the ethical questions before a country
when it seems that a lot
holds the pour in weeds that the middle
class the upper middle class and wealthy
cannot even begin to see well this is an
incredibly important question in fact
it's a question that all countries are
answering of course it's most acute in
countries like India any and there is
some truth to the fact that that you
know poverty will kill as much or if
more than the than the lockdown so I
think there is a great urgency to be
sensible about this and there's a great
urgency to be thoughtful about this I
mean putting people in camps during a
lockdown makes no sense because they are
under no physical distance whatsoever
you know look I'm a big believer in in
low-tech solutions
I think masks work if we can get enough
soap and water those work in and I mean
low-tech masks I mean a t-shirt folded
over twice with a rubber band and you
can find many examples of how to do this
I would I would release several public
service announcements in India you show
people over the Internet over their cell
phones about how to do this but you're
right that the crisis of the migrant
workers is enormous and you know we
don't even really know what the extent
of the spread is without testing so once
again there is something to be said that
poverty will kill as much if not more
than the virus will kill and so this is
a time that as I said a a strong
bipartisan effort to try to get a
message across a band figure out what to
do with migrant workers whether they can
be socially distanced whether we can
provide them with enough food whether
the state can step in and provide them
with facilities or places that they can
actually rest while we move in a manner
that is compatible with not spreading
the virus is of crucial and I I don't
know but is there a task force that's
been appointed to take care of the of
the
movement in India so government's trying
to discourage the movement and it's not
working
it's actually not working then the boy
you know the in the first aftermaths
they were buses arranged after 72 hours
of them walking then there were orders
to not allow them to move and and there
is no bipartisan agreement on this issue
there are chief ministers who say send
them home because it is you know it's
not practical because we don't know how
long this lockdown will last and not
getting wages biggest problem is the
daily wages and they don't get paid and
like every human being in times of
crisis they want to be home and also you
know we've chartered buses for students
who chartered buses airplanes for
stranded Indians so there is that sense
of why can't we send them home the
counter-argument is the virus could move
with them so nobody has easy answers to
this and it really is a model dilemma
the Indian state well so I mean as I
said one one approach would be to
appoint a task force the ICMR is very
thoughtful about this health ministers
in states that have been successful such
discs are very thoughtful about this and
you know one possibility is to appoint a
task force really start random testing
either using the serology or the nasal
swab to figure out what the what the
what the real incidences and then advice
as I said the lowest tech solutions
which are social distancing mask-wearing
and hand washing at this moment I mean
there is no simple answer to this
question there is a tragedy beyond or
proportions and the other tragedy that I
see unfoldings with heart on the ground
is what happens to non covet or patients
so most of them can only get medical
treatment at our public hospitals many
of our particles have become covalence
facilities so you go to these hospitals
and you find
tuberculosis cancer patients actually
being turned away at the door
I have personally now reported two
deaths that have occurred just from not
being able to get medical intervention
anytime and you know the data 1,300
Indians died from TB every day as many
died from cancer
there is a worry in you know in medical
circles here in our preoccupation with
the corporate 19 what happens to all
these other people what happens to other
diseases well so again it's important to
be data-driven the four reasons that we
really don't understand the number of
covert deaths in India has been
disproportionately low compared to many
other countries and we don't know why
there's lots of theories and none of
those theories have been proved but
nonetheless you know if the deaths were
really occurring at the rate that they
are occurring in New York City I mean
you can't hide ten thousand or a hundred
thousand bodies even if you do testing
or you don't do testing when people
start dying on mass you cannot hide that
fact so so I think that I think this is
why an India specific task force would
be very important I know that there are
many in this episode level but this has
to be a central level task force and I
was reading and I read extensively the
extent of Health given to the people who
earn daily wages seems to be
disproportionately low and so therefore
it seems to me that such a task force
could open up a whole series of
movements including finding ways to get
these people to the places that they
need to get to faster so that they can
so that they're not stuck I mean being
stuck in a migrant camp with no social
distancing no masks and no testing seems
to be worse than being stuck either in
the city or in the in the destination
home by far and it will likely create an
iris for the virus and what we want to
do right now is exactly not that if it
is if there's anything that we wants to
do right now it is not to create an itis
for a country where the infection rate
for reasons that we still don't
understand doesn't seem to have peaked
so two things there is a national covert
task force but it's not
looking at the issues of either the
migrant workers or the non Kovach poor
so that's that's something that may need
either attention within the same
umbrella or under a different sort of
banner as it were my second question
would be what do you make of the fact
that India seems to be an outlier there
are people here who are arguing that we
just want to know to be test more or
maybe we still haven't peak or maybe if
you're lucky we are the outliers but do
you have any understanding of why this
might be to be totally Frank I don't and
to be totally Frank the world doesn't
there you know there there have
certainly been cases that have come in
from workers from India who were in
Wuhan and other places and so we
understand those in they came in to
places like Kerala as you know and they
were quickly isolated in quarantine and
they have now as far as I know recovered
from the infection there is the
possibility that there is not so much
travel between infected countries and n
and India but even that seems to be a
little bit of a remote possibility there
has been the idea that it's the
temperature the idea although that
doesn't seem to be totally that doesn't
seem to totally make sense because in
February when I was in Delhi it was just
about as cold as it was in any other
part of the world and other parts of the
world that are warm like Brazil and and
the southern hemisphere have also had
outbreaks of coverage so it is really a
mystery I would say part of the mystery
is that we aren't doing enough testing
if we test it more we would know the
answer but as I said you can't hide aid
a hundred thousand dead bodies and so
there is certainly a mystery and the
world doesn't know the answer finally
you know the CDC I saw was talking about
a possible second wave of this virus by
winter one that if said might even be
worse I was reading that in Washington
Post now if if we do not a vaccine will
take time if the drugs don't give us the
messages that we need countries cannot
comment
and walk down and we're having pushback
from many people within India at least
saying start lifting the lock down
create zones allow some zones to
function maybe tell people to wear masks
take other precautions maybe change
ourselves in behavior and the
precautions we take rather than shut
down the country we also had a more
draconian lockdown or a more absolute
lockdown than other countries for
example we do not have public transport
except for the skeletal bus service
unlike other parts of the country just
for the transport open our aviation is
totally shut the Indian Railways is not
running so we're a unique country in
that way so the lockdown also hits us
hard I think it makes a lot of sense to
lift the lockdown in phases and I think
it makes a lot of sense I mean it's
impossible to anticipate at the winter
and it's impossible to anticipate a
second resurgence of the virus we need
to do the best we can in the United
States this is a big worry we're also
doing the best we can but the best we
can may you know again will be
determined by what actually happens um
I happen to hope that the the drugs will
be available we have you know in our
negotiation so far and as I said I'm not
the only person in this negotiation
there are many many parties many many
individual parties the the general
agreement has been to sell the drugs in
India in a way that just recovers the
cost of making the drugs with a little
bit extra so that we can provide the
royalties or licenses back to these so
this is not a profit-making enterprise
and we are very committed to doing that
but it will take time I think that once
the fear of death is removed and that
you know that this is this turns out to
be obviously a difficult disease but the
fear of death is is removed I think the
the the the economy can be and the
lockdowns can be lifted in a phase wise
manner that is more conducive to anicon
functioning back I mean a functional
economy is that you know is the creative
life of humans
you cannot and and the shift drum from
from barrel from precarity to outright
peril has become very obvious in all
countries but especially India we need
to stop that and so again a data-driven
phase wise lifting of the lockdown in a
very non emotional manner especially
with with low-tech solutions to start
and then moving on to drugs and vaccines
seems to be the right thing to do
unfortunately but there's no rights
aren't there's no quick answer this will
have to play itself out but those are
the best answers that we have okay thank
you so much that was very educated very
informative I'm hoping to bring you back
next week with Karen Shaw I know both of
you are doing a lot of work on this
together so let's hope we can have that
very important conversation because it's
important to keep politics and emotion
both out of this conversation in there
and keep it as science driven as
possible and thank you very much thank
you thank you and thanks to all your
work but